Add coSMicQC blog (#28)
WayScience/waysciencelab.com: _posts/2024-12-19-cosmicqc.md

---
title: "coSMicQC: A step toward quality control and improvement of morphology profiles"
author: Jenna Tomkinson
member: jenna-tomkinson
tags:
  - opinions
  - process
  - software
---
# Let's tour the single-cell morphological galaxy with coSMicQC!

Hi everyone! 🤩

Wow, it has been over a year since the last blog post.
*cough*
I think some dust might have accumulated. 🧹

All jokes aside, it has been a very busy year for the Way Lab!
We have posted three preprints:

1. [Reproducible image-based profiling with Pycytominer](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10690292/)
2. [A morphology and secretome map of pyroptosis](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.04.26.591386v1)

> 3. [High-content microscopy and machine learning characterize a cell morphology signature of NF1 genotype in Schwann cells](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.09.11.612546v1)

Author: Thank you for this perspective! I was not thinking long-term with those paragraphs, but it makes sense to keep stuff like that in places that are more "in-the-moment". 

I have removed the section, I might consider adding a sentence or more if I think of something fun. Thanks!

We have also published one paper just this month, called [Toward generalizable phenotype prediction from single-cell morphology representations](https://bmcmethods.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s44330-024-00014-3). 🎉

> Now that I have a bit of bandwidth, I wanted to take the time to come back to go over something that I am very excited and passionate about:

Author: Thanks!

## Contents

1. 📋 [What is quality control for single-cell morphology profiles?](https://www.waysciencelab.com/2024/12/19/cosmicqc#defining-quality-control-of-single-cell-morphology-profiles)
2. 📉 [What current exists for this topic?](https://www.waysciencelab.com/2024/12/19/cosmicqc#what-currently-exists)
3. 🌌 [Intro to coSMicQC](https://www.waysciencelab.com/2024/12/19/cosmicqc#introduction-to-cosmicqc)
4. 🎯 [Example of impact](https://www.waysciencelab.com/2024/12/19/cosmicqc#example-of-cosmicqc-impact)
5. 🚀 [Where do we go from here?](https://www.waysciencelab.com/2024/12/19/cosmicqc#whats-next)

## Defining quality control of single cell morphology profiles

> **Quality Control (QC)**  
> The process of validating and enforcing a specific standard across all products.

> **Single-cell morphology profiles**  
> Features (e.g., area, texture, intensity, etc.) extracted from images of cells. 
> Traditionally, profiles are formatted in a data frame where each row is single-cell, and columns are either metadata or feature extracted from a specific segmented part of a cell (e.g., nucleus, whole cell, or cytoplasm). 

> Putting these two definitions together, the main definition is the process of enforcing a standard quality across the single cells and their features derived from their respective segmented parts.

Author: Yup, that is clear, added!

### Background on image-based profiling

If you are unfamiliar to the standard process of image-based profiling, there are typically 2 main steps after collecting raw images:

{%
  include figure.html
  image="images/blog/cosmicqc/simple_image_based_profiling.png"
  width="100%"
%}
> Simple workflow for image-based profiling including intermediate steps for CellProfiler and pycytominer.

> Extraction of morphology features from images is traditional performed using the software [CellProfiler](https://cellprofiler.org/). 

Author: Will do! 👍

> There are other feature extraction softwares like incarta, but we will be focusing on CellProfiler in this blog post. 

Author: Added! 👍

> CellProfiler is used to perform multiple tasks, include illumination correction, segmentation (traditionally of nuclei, cells, and cytoplasm), and feature extraction. 

Author: Updated!

**PLUG TIME!**
If you aren't familiar with illumination correction (IC) or want to learn more, feel free to read the two blog posts on the topic, "[Illumination Correction Made Easier](https://www.waysciencelab.com/2022/08/09/illumcorrect.html)" and "[Steps for Performing Illumination Correction in Microscopy Images](https://www.waysciencelab.com/2023/08/07/illumsteps.html)". 

> I also created a blog post regarding the pros and cons of two segmentation methods if you are interested called "[Segmentation Software Usability and Performance: Part I](https://www.waysciencelab.com/2022/11/01/segmentation.html)".

Author: updated!

**OKAY, PLUG TIME OVER!**

> Once features are extracted, the current most popular method of processing is by aggregating the single-cell features to well-level population, either through median or averaging.

Author: Updated!

But, this "reduction of noise" is a bit fishy to me.
If you aggregate a bunch of poorly segmented single-cell profiles, then aggregating will just exacerbate the issue and mis-represent the biology of the population.
This leads me into why I think quality control at the single-cell level for morphology profiles is a necessary step, regardless of if you plan to process your data as bulk (aggregated) or single cells.

### Why single-cell quality control?

Quality control of single-cell profiles is very important to avoid mis-interpretation of the results, and ensure that downstream analysis is picking up biologically relevant information.
Imagine you have an picture of cells and you want to cut out each individual cell.
As you are cutting, your hand could end up slipping or you get distracted, so your individual cell cut-out ends up missing part of the cell.
This is what a segmentation error is. 
These cut-outs with incomplete cells are missing vital and biological information about that cell.
Quality control acts like a checklist, ensuring that each cut-out meets the required standards, such as verifying that no parts of the cell are missing.

{%
  include figure.html

>   image="images/blog/cosmicqc/segmentation_cartoon.png"

Author: Thank you!

  width="100%"
%}
> *Simplified representation of single-cell segmentation.*

In the Way Lab, we traditionally process single-cell data, so we expect heterogeneity within our samples.
We do not want the heterogeneity influenced by technical factors, like poor segmentations.

> So, we want to remove any of these poor segmentation before we perform important pre-processing steps like normalization and feature selection, which will be influenced noise.

Author: Added!

> The Way Lab creates and maintains softwares, including pycytominer and [CytoTable](https://cytomining.github.io/CytoTable/) (which is not including in the above example, but we expect to become a standard in the future).

Author: Agreed, removed. I am actually removing the whole statement because it doesn't really fit in now with the sections and messes with the flow IMO.

> CytoTable reformats the output from CellProfiler, where each feature per segmentation is in its own table, to one parquet file each row is a single-cell and the columns are the combined features per cell from each table.

Author: Added!

> Single-cell quality control for morphology profiles should occur in between CytoTable and pycytominer.

Author: I will take some time to consider this.

But, what methodology exists so that we can perform this task?

---

> ## What currently exists?

Author: Updated!

If you are familiar with the RNA-seq world, you will know that the concept of *Single-cell quality control* itself is not new.
It is a well known process within scRNA-seq pipelines where individual cells are filtered out using a metric(s) that detects if it is likely an artifact or contains noise.

> It is such a well-established part of this field that there even is [a whole website detected to scRNA tools](https://www.scrna-tools.org/), where can filter for specifically [quality control tools](https://www.scrna-tools.org/tools?sort=name&cats=QualityControl), which provides at least one hundred different options to try!

Author: Added!

This is also an important step in not just single-cell, but also bulk RNA-seq as well, which has existed for over two decades.
scRNA-seq has been around for over a decade, so there has been a lot of time to develop these methods across both technologies.

> [Cell Painting](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0080999) was first developed in 2013, meaning that image-based profiling and extraction of morphological profiles is a new field, but still been around are 11 years.

Author: added!

Single-cell quality control for morphology profiles is not has well developed in the image-based profiling realm.

I will preface this by saying that you are currently able to filter objects in CellProfiler using morphology measurements, but the module isn't very intuitive.

> You can set limits for what measurement is considered good or bad, but how would you know what the limits of a feature is without exporting the data and performing analyses to get a sense of the range of values for your dataset.

Author: Agreed! At least from my experience I haven't found the way to do this in CellProfiler unless you use CellProfiler analyst, but you still need to export the data.

> You can set limits for what measurement is considered good or bad, but how would you know what the limits of a feature is without exporting the data and performing analyses to get a sense of the range of values for your dataset.

Reviewer: is it worth adding a brief sentence about CP Analyst?

In my opinion, this module is good to have, but it isn't a solution to single-cell quality control.

> I did conduct some research into seeing if there were already methods out there to perform this task.
> I was only able to identify one paper that makes an attempt at this process.
> The publication in BMC Bioinformatics is called "[A cell-level quality control workflow for high-throughput image analysis](https://bmcbioinformatics.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12859-020-03603-5)", and it was published back in 2020.
> In the background section, they state:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I checked to see if there were existing single-cell quality control methods for image-based profiling.
I was only able to find one paper, published in BMC Bioinformatics, called "[A cell-level quality control workflow for high-throughput image analysis](https://bmcbioinformatics.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12859-020-03603-5)", and it was published in 2020.

It was an interesting read!
For example, in the background section, Qiu et al. state:
```

Author: Updated!

> *"To our knowledge, this represents the first QC method and scoring metric that operate at the cell level."*

Since I couldn't find any other paper that focuses on quality control at the single-cell level, I completely agree with their statement. 
To summarize the paper, they present a cell-level quality control workflow which uses machine learning to detect artifacts within images.
They utilized CellProfiler to segment single cells and extract features from both the cells and whole images.
They wanted to group images based on their phenotype, so they utilized CellProfiler features (like `PowerLogLogSlope`, `FocusScore`, `MeanIntensity`, `Cell Count`, etc.) to detect images that contains artifacts versus no artifacts.

> Once images were grouped together, they performed a method using KDE to sample the images into their respective phenotypes.

Author: 👍

> They then trained an SVM (Support Vector Machine) per phenotype group, to classify where there are artifacts and where there are cells.

Author: True it is regions in the image!

> I believe I barely scratch the surface of the complexities behind this method, so feel free to read the paper if you want a more in-depth look.

Author: Updated!

> What I really liked about this paper is that it is attempting to preserve images that include artifact, as these images still contain other cells.

Author: updated!

> It is different than the current process where whole images are removed that fail QC metrics like blur and over-saturation (traditional done in CellProfiler).

Author: updated!

> But, I also have my suspicions about using cells that come from an image with corruption, such as an artifact.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

But, I also have my suspicions about using cells that come from an image with corruption, such as an artifact.
```

Author: updated!

I wonder how much things like an artifact or smudge could be directly impacting the biology the cells.

> In my opinion, I would rather default to losing those cells in an image than risk any issues in downstream interpretation of the results do to any impacts the artifacts in an image had.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This would be a cool research project, but, in my opinion, I would rather lose cells in an image with an artifact than risk any issues in downstream interpretation of the results that might be due to any impacts the artifacts in the image had.
```

Author: updated!

I have two main concerns from this paper, specifically for it's generalizability and usability in my own pipelines:

> 1. It was not clear to me how this method is filtering out artifacts at the single-cell level. From what I understood from the figures, the SVM are able to detect where there is artifacts and where there are cells, but I didn't see where in their pipeline to they remove segmentations from the CellProfiler output. This is a big concern for generalizability as it seems like you would need to train SVMs on your data to be able to apply this method but there isn't a direct link to that output and filtering cells.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. It was not clear to me how this method is filtering out artifacts at the single-cell level. From what I understood from the figures, the SVM is able to detect where there is artifacts and where there are cells, but I didn't see where in their pipeline that they remove single-cells from the CellProfiler output. This is a big concern for generalizability as it seems like you would need to train SVMs on your data to be able to apply this method but there isn't a direct link to that output and how they actually filtered cells.
```

Author: Updated!

> 2. The code is available via FigShare, but it was a bit hard to find and parse. Since it is not on GitHub, that also limits the usability since there isn't any environment or dependencies I could find and there isn't a way to create issues and contact the maintainers for assistance. As well, I found that the code I could find was not easy to understand and lacked documentation. I want to make clear, I appreciate that they made the code available and open source which is more than some other papers. My main point is that I don't think this method is feasible to include in my standard workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The code is available via FigShare, but it was a bit hard to parse. Since it is not on GitHub, that also limits the usability since there isn't an environment or dependencies, and there isn't a way to create issues and contact the maintainers for assistance. As well, I found that the code was not easy to understand and lacked documentation. I want to make clear, I appreciate that they made the code available and open source which is more than some other papers! My main point is that I don't think this method is feasible to include in my standard workflow.
```

In conclusion, I want to thank the authors of this paper for their hard work and their important contributions to pushing the field towards developing quality control methodology at the single-cell level for morphology profiles.

> This paper fueled the fire that I had started in myself about wanting to pursue working on a new methodology, one that is simple, to filter out poor quality segmentations from single-cell morphology profiles.

Reviewer: Do you know if there are quality control methods for bulk morphology profiles? This might be an important paragraph to add. If not, you can discuss anomaly detection, which is the opposite side of the same coin as quality control. I know of at least Assaf and Erin's preprint - they might have some citations in there for us to explore.

Author: I don't see anything in particular, but I am now finding that Juan's paper from back in 2017 mentions cell-level quality control, so I think I want to focus on adding a paragraph for that. 

I don't think adding anomaly detection will help the blog, maybe only add more confusion since anomaly and outlier can be considered the same thing.

---

## Introduction to coSMicQC

After 2 and half years of being in my position and performing image-based profiling, I have come to realize that I am not perfect (shocking I know! 😱).
No matter how much I try to manually optimize my segmentation parameters in CellProfiler or when using [Cellpose](https://www.cellpose.org/) or [Stardist](https://stardist.net/), it will not work for all of the single cells in my datasets.

> Now, I am not saying this is a fault of my own, but segmentation errors are a persistent issue and is currently a problem that hasn't been solved to this day.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, I am not necessarily saying this is a fault of my own 😉, but segmentation errors are a persistent issue and it is currently a problem that hasn't been solved to this day.
```

Author: updated!

> My point is, you can expect in all of your datasets that it will contain some poorly segmented cells that can be described as technical artifacts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
My point is, you can expect all of your datasets to contain some poorly segmented cells that can be described as technical artifacts.
```

Author: updated!

You can also expect that debris or smudges could also end up being mis-segmented as cells.
When working with single-cell data, we do not want these technical artifacts impacting the interpretation of our results.
Thus, was born this simple idea in my head.

Why not just filter out single cells based on the extracted morphology features?

You wouldn't need to train any model or perform any other pipeline.

> You already have the data in your lap to use, but it is how you use that data is important.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You already have the data in your lap to use, but how you use that data is what is important.
```

Author: updated!

> In comes, [coSMicQC](https://github.com/WayScience/coSMicQC), or Single cell Morphology Quality Control!

Reviewer: Consider adding the logo, or maybe even the logo coming out from behind a red curtain 😆

Author: Ooo I like this!

> This new method works by creating conditions, represented by dictionaries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This new method works by creating "dictionaries of conditions".
```

Is this edit true? It might prompt the next couple of sentences where you define this term

Author: It is true, but it is probably a bit more technical than I want, but I am open to add this back if it is necessary.

> A condition is a feature or group of features that will detect a specific type of technical artifact.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A condition is a feature or group of features that will capture a specific type of technical artifact.
```

Reviewer: you define condition, but then what is a "dictionary"?

Author: Hmm, I don't think the blog needs to be too technical, so I think I will remove it.

For example, nuclei area and intensity can work together as a condition to detect large nuclei with high intensity which represents segmentation of clustered/overlapping nuclei.

> You condition will also need to include the standard deviation from the mean in which you expect these outliers to be located.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your condition will also need how many standard deviations from the mean that you expect these outliers to be located.
```

Author: updated!

If you want to detect cells above a mean, you use a positive value, and vice versa for cells below the mean.

{%
  include figure.html
  image="images/blog/cosmicqc/area_outlier_example.png"
  width="100%"
%}
> Example of how outliers are detected based on nuclei area in coSMicQC.

> We then apply the function `find_outliers` to the simple conditions independently, yielding a dataframe with only the identified outliers, including metadata and the features used to detect the outliers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then apply the function `find_outliers` to the simple conditions and voila, coSMicQC yields a dataframe with flagged single-cell outliers.
```

True? What you have is a bit confusing to me

Reviewer: One other thing that was a bit unclear to me (putting my naive reader hat on 🎩 ) is "apply" - what do you mean apply, how do I do this? I think to prevent this question, you need to add a paragraph describing that it is open-source software that we developed with sustainable software development practices. You can even shoutout to @d33bs 📣

Author: 100% agreed! I will update

A summary is also outputted, which includes the total number of outliers detected, the percent of the total cells in the data detected as outliers, and the range of the values of the outliers for the features used in the condition.

> A highlight of coSMicQC is that you are able to visualize single-cell segmentations within the notebook if you provide the original images and exported outlines from CellProfiler, through the use of a dataframe format called [CytoDataFrame](https://github.com/WayScience/CytoDataFrame).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A highlight of coSMicQC is that you are able to visualize single-cell segmentations within the notebook if you provide the original images and exported outlines from CellProfiler, through the use of a novel dataframe format, built on top of `pandas`, that we call [CytoDataFrame](https://github.com/WayScience/CytoDataFrame).
```

Author: 👍

> This makes it more streamlined to assess if your conditions are working without having to go outside of the notebook via your file manager, Fiji, or CellProfiler to see what the segmented cells look like.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This makes it more streamlined to assess if your conditions are working without having to go outside of the notebook and jump to your handy file manager, Fiji, or CellProfiler to see what the segmented cells look like.
```

Author: 👍

This feature is still being developed as we find more datasets with varying conditions for image file structure.

Once you have optimized the conditions, you can then use the function `label_outliers` which will output the original dataframe with columns for each condition and if a single-cell passed or failed each condition.
You can then choose to either save the original dataframe with the new columns and keep outliers or remove single cells that were detected as outliers.
You can also not use the coSMicQC functionality and take the indices from the `find_outliers` outputs and remove single cells that way.

> We have elected to call the outputs that come from coSMicQC as `cleaned` profiles.

Reviewer: I recommend you shift the structure of this slightly.

1. Describe, in general what coSMicQC does.
2. Describe, in detail, the different functions of coSMicQC to achieve this general function

Author: I will try to make a stab at this.

With these cleaned profiles, further downstream processes should yield higher quality results.
We have been able to test this hypothesis using one of our projects, and prove that there is merit to pursing single-cell quality control. 

---

## Example of coSMicQC impact

> The conception of coSMicQC came from this project, which unfortunately is now within a private repository (due to external factors).
> The repository, titled [Cell Painting predicts cardiac fibrosis](https://github.com/WayScience/cellpainting_predicts_cardiac_fibrosis), will become public once the respective manuscript has been published.
> 
> A brief overview of the project is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I don't think you need to state this. It is another example of something that will become irrelevant (hopefully) in a few months.

Author: Sounds good, removed!

> Cardiac fibroblasts from tissue of both heart failure patients and organ donor patients without heart failure were collected, plated, and imaged using a modified Cell Painting assay. 

Reviewer: active voice... our collaborators...

Author: updated!

We performed an image-based profiling workflow to segment and extract single-cell morphology features. 
We trained a logistic regression binary classifier to predict if a single-cell comes from a failing or non-failing heart.

Within the workflow, we performed single-cell quality control to clean the data using coSMicQC.

> One of the biggest problems in this dataset is the high confluence, which occurs due to proliferation.

Author: updated!

This leads to very clustered nuclei and higher intensity of the cells across organelles within the clusters compared to the peripheral cells.

> We created two conditions to find these exact poor segmentation: cells area to find abnormally small cells and large nuclei area and high nuclei intensity to detect over-segmented nuclei clusters.

Author: updated!

{%
  include figure.html
  image="images/blog/cosmicqc/conditions_example_plot.png"
  width="100%"
%}
> Plots of conditions with example FOVs of good versus failed single cells.

To evaluate if single-cell quality control is important to training a high quality model, we perform a bootstrapping analysis using holdout data (e.g., data that the model never saw during training).
We trained a new model with the same parameters, but using non-quality controlled training data.
There are two holdout datasets to evaluate, one that has had QC performed on the data and another without.
We will apply the models to their respective datasets, e.g., QC model with QC holdout data and no QC model with no QC holdout data.

We then perform what is called bootstrapping, where sub-samples of the data are taken to collect 1,000 different datasets of the same size as the original dataset.
This means that it will randomly take single cells from the data (sometimes repeated) to create a new population, which represents what we can expect in real-life.

> We then calculate the ROC AUC metric, or  Receiver Operating Characteristic Area Under the Curve.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We then calculate the ROC AUC metric, or Receiver Operating Characteristic Area Under the Curve.
```

Author: updated!

We applying coSMicQC to a dataset where there are cells treated with many different perturbations, we saw that nuclei with very interesting phenotypes ended up failing quality control (red) at a higher rate than those that looked more normal.

{%
  include figure.html
  image="images/blog/cosmicqc/phenotype_example.png"
  width="100%"
%}
> Example of passing (green) and failing (red) single cells for a normal phenotype FOV (left) and interesting phenotype FOV (right).

This means that unfortunately, coSMicQC is not robust to some phenotypes and might over-correct the data.
But, quality control is not a perfect science.
The purpose of quality control, regardless of field, is to maximize the amount of poor quality cell removed while minimizing the amount of good quality cells being wrongly eliminated from the dataset.
This means that no matter what, you must expect some false positives, but we can attempt to control for this.

Given that we know the current limitations of the current simple methodology of coSMicQC, we are looking to improve by finding new methods to implement into our software.

> Some of the current ideas we are thinking of testing include DBSCAN (proposed by Erik Serrano) and PCA or UMAP to utilize either all features or selected features to find outliers based on clusters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some of the current ideas we are thinking of testing include DBSCAN (proposed by Erik Serrano aka @axiomcura) and PCA or UMAP to utilize either all features or selected features to find outliers based on clusters.
```

Author: updated!

---
title: "coSMicQC: A step toward quality control and improvement of morphology profiles"
author: Jenna Tomkinson
member: jenna-tomkinson
tags:
  - opinions
  - process
  - software
---
# Let's tour the single-cell morphological galaxy with coSMicQC!

Hi everyone! 🤩

Now that I have a bit of bandwidth, I wanted to take the time to come back to go over something that I am very excited and passionate about:

✨ *Quality control of single-cell morphology profiles* ✨

In this blog post, I will go over what is quality control for morphology profiles, what current work exists on this topic, the software (coSMicQC) that we have developed to help in this topic, and where we hope to go from here.

## Contents

1. 📋 [What is quality control for single-cell morphology profiles?](#defining-quality-control-of-single-cell-morphology-profiles)
2. 📉 [What current exists for this topic?](#what-quality-control-methods-currently-exist)
3. 🌌 [Intro to coSMicQC](#introduction-to-cosmicqc)
4. 🎯 [Example of impact](#example-of-cosmicqc-impact)

> 5. 🚀 [Where do we go from here?](#whats-next)

Author: Looks like all of these links work 🙌🏻

**PLUG TIME!**
If you aren't familiar with illumination correction (IC) or want to learn more, feel free to read the two blog posts on the topic, "[Illumination Correction Made Easier](https://www.waysciencelab.com/2022/08/09/illumcorrect.html)" and "[Steps for Performing Illumination Correction in Microscopy Images](https://www.waysciencelab.com/2023/08/07/illumsteps.html)". 
I also wrote a blog post regarding the pros and cons of two segmentation methods if you are interested called "[Segmentation Software Usability and Performance: Part I](https://www.waysciencelab.com/2022/11/01/segmentation.html)".
**OKAY, PLUG TIME OVER!**

The next step in the workflow is [CytoTable](https://cytomining.github.io/CytoTable/), which reformats the output from CellProfiler (and other feature extraction software), to create a standardized parquet file where each row is a single-cell and the columns are the combined features per cell.

Lastly, researchers preprocess the standardized output before performing analysis and machine learning. 

> Researchers will then aggregate single-cell features to the well-level population, either by taking the median or averaging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Researchers will then aggregate single-cell features to the well-level population, either by taking the median or mean.
```

"averaging" means either median or mean

Author: Thanks for catching, corrected!

This process can be done within a software called, [pycytominer](https://pycytominer.readthedocs.io/en/stable/), which is optimized to process morphological profiles from multiple outputs.

Aggregation removes the heterogeneity of the population and reduces noise.

> But, this "reduction of noise" is a bit fishy to me.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But, this "reduction of noise" is a bit fishy 🐟 to me.
```

This provides at least one hundred different options to try! 👀 
This is also an important step in not just single-cell, but also bulk RNA-seq as well, which has existed for over two decades.
scRNA-seq has been around for over a decade, so there has been a lot of time to develop these methods across both technologies.

[Cell Painting](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0080999) was first developed in 2013, meaning that image-based profiling and extraction of morphological profiles is a new field, but it still has been around for [over a decade](https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.02767).
However, single-cell quality control for morphology profiling is not nearly as thoroughly developed. 😢

This lack of development could be because of the lack of trust in this method, which is described in the 2017 paper, "[Data-analysis strategies for image-based cell profiling](https://www.nature.com/articles/nmeth.4397)".

> Caicedo et al. describes some methods of cell-level outlier detection, including model-free and model-based, but not specifically related to image-based profiling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Caicedo et al. describe some methods of cell-level outlier detection, including model-free and model-based, but not specifically related to image-based profiling.
```

Reviewer: I don't understand what you mean by "not specifically related to image-based profiling"

What is it for then?

Author: Just general stats methods meant for any dataset. I will try to make that more clear or just remove.

Their main concern is that this method of quality control can assume homogeneity and remove interesting phenotypes (spoiler, we do run into this issue!).
This is why most labs skip this step.
Honestly, this concern applies to all quality control methods and underscores the importance of striving for continuous improvement.

> Currently, you are able to filter objects in CellProfiler using morphology measurements in its own module.

Reviewer: what is an "object" - up to this point you're calling it "single-cell", maybe this works?

```suggestion
Currently, you are able to filter "objects" (some are single-cells, some might be debris) in CellProfiler using morphology measurements in its own module.
```

Author: Hmm objects is what the CellProfiler module is called since it can be nuclei, cells, or cytoplasm, just whatever being segmented. Let me correct this.

> You can set limits for what feature measurement is considered good or bad, but without exporting the data and exploring the feature space, you cannot know the range of values for your dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can set limits for what feature measurement is considered good or bad, but without exporting the data and exploring the feature space, you do not know the range of feature measurements for your dataset.
```

Author: updated!

In my opinion, this module is good to have, but it isn't a solution to single-cell quality control.

I checked to see if there were existing single-cell quality control methods for image-based profiling.
I was only able to find one paper, published in BMC Bioinformatics, called "[A cell-level quality control workflow for high-throughput image analysis](https://bmcbioinformatics.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12859-020-03603-5)", and it was published in 2020.
It was an interesting read!

For example, in the background section, Qiu et al. state:

> *"To our knowledge, this represents the first QC method and scoring metric that operate at the cell level."*

Since I couldn't find any other paper that focuses on quality control at the single-cell level published before, I completely agree with their statement, they are definitely the first.

I actually did come across another paper after this one (published in 2022) that cites their work, called "[Image-based cell profiling enhancement via data cleaning methods](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0267280)"

> I won't be going into depth in this blog post about this paper, but the main highlight is that they did make an attempt at cell-level outlier detection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main highlight in this paper, is that they did attempt cell-level outlier detection.
```

Reviewer: Let's plan on doing a JC of this article in 2025!

Author: 💯 Absolutely! I can plan that for my first one in Feb (based on the schedule)

Specifically, they used a method called Histogram-Based Outlier Score.
They utilized the function from a Python package called [PyOD](https://github.com/yzhao062/pyod), a well-established package dedicated to anomaly detection.
Unfortunately, this paper does not include any link to reproducible code for how they used this method to detect outliers with CellProfiler features.
But, they made a very promising statement:

> *"It turns out that the cell outlier detection is a more effective method in improving the overall profile quality, while regress-out mainly improves the very top connections."*

Given this claim, we can use this to further fuel the push towards improving single cell quality control.
Unfortunately, this means there are only two papers that are performing this process, so we still have a ways to go. ⏰

> But, let's get back to the first ever attempt at single cell quality control, shall we?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But, let's get back to the first ever attempt at single cell quality control (Qiu et al. 2020), shall we?
```

Author: added!

They utilized CellProfiler to segment single cells and extract features from both the cells and whole images.
They wanted to group images based on their phenotype, so they utilized CellProfiler features (like `PowerLogLogSlope`, `FocusScore`, `MeanIntensity`, `Cell Count`, etc.) to detect images that contains artifacts versus no artifacts.
Once images were grouped together, they performed a method using kernel density estimate (KDE) to sample the images into their respective phenotypes.
They then trained an SVM (Support Vector Machine) per phenotype group, to classify regions in images where there are artifacts and where there are cells.

This is only a brief summary, so feel free to read the paper if you want a more in-depth look.

What I really liked about this paper is that it is attempting to preserve images that include artifacts, as these images still contain other cells.
It is different than the current process where whole images are removed that fail QC metrics like blur and over-saturation (traditionally done in CellProfiler).

But, I also have my suspicions about using cells that come from an image with corruption, such as an artifact.

> I wonder how much things like an artifact or smudge could be directly impacting the biology the cells.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I wonder how much things like an artifact or smudge could be directly impacting the biology the cells. 🤔 
```

Author: added!

Now, I am not necessarily saying this is a fault of my own 😉, but segmentation errors are a persistent issue and it is currently a problem that hasn't been solved to this day.

My point is, you can expect all of your datasets to contain some poorly segmented cells that can be described as technical artifacts.
You can also expect that debris or smudges could also end up being mis-segmented as cells.
When working with single-cell data, we do not want these technical artifacts impacting the interpretation of our results.
Thus, was born this simple idea in my head.

Why not just filter out single cells based on the extracted morphology features?

You wouldn't need to train any model or perform any other pipeline.
You already have the data in your lap to use, but how you use that data is what is important.

In arriving to the stage, [coSMicQC](https://github.com/WayScience/coSMicQC), or Single cell Morphology Quality Control!

{%
  include figure.html
  image="images/blog/cosmicqc/cosmicqc_stage.png"

>   width="100%"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  width="75%"
```

This figure is currently very large! Please feel free to ignore this, or to play around with this parameter

Reviewer: I do love it though!

Author: Ohhhh I didn't notice! I agree, let me change it and view the deployment to see if that is better, thanks for pointing out!

In summary, coSMicQC uses extracted morphology features directly from CellProfiler, performs normalization of specific features that are most related to detecting poor segmentation, and uses standard deviation to identify single cells that are considered technical outliers.

Going into more detail on this new method, it works by first creating conditions.
A condition is a feature or group of features that will capture a specific type of technical artifact.
For example, nuclei area and intensity can work together as a condition to detect large nuclei with high intensity which represents segmentation of clustered/overlapping nuclei.
Your condition will also need how many standard deviations from the mean that you expect these outliers to be located.
If you want to detect cells above a mean, you use a positive value, and vice versa for cells below the mean.

{%
  include figure.html
  image="images/blog/cosmicqc/area_outlier_example.png"
  width="100%"
%}
> Example of how outliers are detected based on nuclei area in coSMicQC.

> You can use the function `find_outliers` to the simple conditions and voila, coSMicQC yields a dataframe with flagged single-cell outliers per condition.

Reviewer: just checking that this is still the correct function name

```suggestion
You can use the function `find_outliers()` to the simple conditions and voila, coSMicQC yields a dataframe with flagged single-cell outliers per condition.
```

Author: It is correct! I will add that suggestion!

A summary is also outputted, which includes the total number of outliers detected, the percent of the total cells in the data detected as outliers, and the range of the values of the outliers for the features used in the condition.

A highlight of coSMicQC is that you are able to visualize single-cell segmentations within the notebook if you provide the original images and exported outlines from CellProfiler, through the use of a novel dataframe format, built on top of `pandas`, that we call [CytoDataFrame](https://github.com/WayScience/CytoDataFrame).
This open-source formatter is also developed by Dave Bunten! 📣
This makes it more streamlined to assess if your conditions are working without having to go outside of the notebook and jump to your handy file manager, Fiji, or CellProfiler to see what the segmented cells look like.
This feature is still being developed as we find more datasets with varying conditions for image file structure.

> Once you have optimized the conditions, you can then use the function `label_outliers` which will output the original dataframe with columns for each condition and if a single-cell passed or failed each condition.
> You can then choose to either save the original dataframe with the new columns and keep outliers or remove single cells that were detected as outliers.
> You can also not use the coSMicQC functionality and take the indices from the `find_outliers` outputs and remove single cells that way.

Reviewer: consider deleting this

```suggestion
```

Author: Fair, I think the main point is detecting the outliers, people can then do what they want. I might keep 219 though maybe.

---

## Example of coSMicQC impact

> Collaborators from [the McKinsey lab at CU Anschutz](https://medschool.cuanschutz.edu/cardiology/research/basic-translational-research/mckinsey-lab) collected, plated, and imaged cardiac fibroblasts from tissue of both heart failure patients and organ donor patients without heart failure using a modified Cell Painting assay. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Collaborators from [the McKinsey lab at CU Anschutz](https://medschool.cuanschutz.edu/cardiology/research/basic-translational-research/mckinsey-lab) collected, plated, and imaged cardiac fibroblasts from tissue of both heart failure patients and organ donors without heart failure using a modified Cell Painting assay. 
```

Author: Updated!

As well, given the results from that paper I referenced previously, we might considering incorporating the HBOS method from the PyOD package into coSMicQC.

Our big goal for 2025 is publish a paper for coSMicQC, which means we will be testing on more datasets.
We plan on updating this blog with more sections that include the results from evaluating on more data, so please look out for more!

---

## Final thoughts

If you have gotten to the end of this blog and have an idea that you want to propose, please feel free to [add an issue](https://github.com/WayScience/coSMicQC/issues) to the coSMicQC GitHub!
We would really like to make a push towards standardizing this process within the traditional image-based profiling workflow.
We hope to build a community around single-cell quality control for morphology profiles, so we can lead the field to a future with higher-quality datasets.

Thank you for reading, and happy profiling! 👩🏻‍💻

### Acknowledgements

Thank you to the Way Lab for their constant support!

> Thank you especially to Dave Bunten for their direct contributions to coSMicQC and to striving for improved data quality and standardization!

Reviewer: might want to also add Erik

Author: I will add a mention directly to Erik for his continued interest and ideas! :)

> Figures were either generated in [Excalidraw](https://excalidraw.com/) using emojis derived mainly from [Google's emoji combiner tool](https://fonts.google.com/noto/specimen/Noto+Color+Emoji). One emoji was derived from [AI Emoji Generator](https://emojis.sh/) (stage and curtains).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Figures were either generated in [Excalidraw](https://excalidraw.com/) using emojis derived mainly from [Google's emoji combiner tool](https://fonts.google.com/noto/specimen/Noto+Color+Emoji).
One emoji was derived from [AI Emoji Generator](https://emojis.sh/) (stage and curtains).
```

Author: Thank you for catching! fixed

---
title: "coSMicQC: A step toward quality control and improvement of morphology profiles"
author: Jenna Tomkinson
member: jenna-tomkinson
tags:
  - opinions
  - process

>   - software

Reviewer 2: Consider another specific tag here maybe - "quality control"?

Author: That sounds good to me, I will add it!

---
# Let's tour the single-cell morphological galaxy with coSMicQC!

Hi everyone! 🤩

> Now that I have a bit of bandwidth, I wanted to take the time to come back to go over something that I am very excited and passionate about:

Reviewer 2: Consider removing the time-tense of this sentence (i.e. outside audiences may not understand "now" or "bandwidth" in the context of this work).

Author: I will remove the first part, but keep the same casual style, thanks for pointing out!

> Now that I have a bit of bandwidth, I wanted to take the time to come back to go over something that I am very excited and passionate about:

Reviewer 2: Suggestions for simplification.

```suggestion
Now that I have a bit of bandwidth, I wanted to take time to go over something I am very excited and passionate about:
```

Author: I have updated this, thanks!

✨ *Quality control of single-cell morphology profiles* ✨

> In this blog post, I will go over what is quality control for morphology profiles, what current work exists on this topic, the software (coSMicQC) that we have developed to help in this topic, and where we hope to go from here.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this blog post I will go over what is quality control for morphology profiles, existing work on this topic, the software (coSMicQC) that we have developed to help in this area, and where we hope to go from here.
```

Author: added!

## Contents

1. 📋 [What is quality control for single-cell morphology profiles?](#defining-quality-control-of-single-cell-morphology-profiles)

> 2. 📉 [What current exists for this topic?](#what-quality-control-methods-currently-exist)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. 📉 [What are the current methods for addressing this topic?](#what-quality-control-methods-currently-exist)
```

Author: added!

> 3. 🌌 [Intro to coSMicQC](#introduction-to-cosmicqc)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. 🌌 [Introduction to coSMicQC](#introduction-to-cosmicqc)
```

Author: updated!

> 4. 🎯 [Example of impact](#example-of-cosmicqc-impact)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. 🎯 [Example of coSMicQC's impact](#example-of-cosmicqc-impact)
```

Author: updated

5. 🚀 [Where do we go from here?](#whats-next)

## Defining quality control of single cell morphology profiles

> **Quality Control (QC)**  

> > The process of validating and enforcing a specific standard across all products.

Reviewer 2: Consider adding the context of "scientific quality control" to help distinguish from industrial or business procedures which use the same language but may differ in focus.

Author: I am doing just general definitions here to show that this topic is universal, but thanks for the suggestion!

> **Single-cell morphology profiles**  
> Features (e.g., area, texture, intensity, etc.) extracted from images of cells. 

> > Traditionally, profiles are formatted in a data frame where each row is single-cell, and columns are either metadata or feature extracted from a specific segmented part of a cell (e.g., nucleus, whole cell, or cytoplasm). 

Reviewer 2: Either this or "dataframe" as one word.
```suggestion
> Traditionally, profiles are formatted in a table where each row is single-cell, and columns are either metadata or feature extracted from a specific segmented part of a cell (e.g., nucleus, whole cell, or cytoplasm). 
```

Author: updated!

> Putting these two definitions together, single-cell quality control is the process of enforcing a standard quality based on single-cell morphology features, which we measure based on segmentation.

Reviewer 2: Do these definitions come from anywhere in particular? Consider providing a reference if so.

## Contents

1. 📋 [What is quality control for single-cell morphology profiles?](#defining-quality-control-of-single-cell-morphology-profiles)
2. 📉 [What current exists for this topic?](#what-quality-control-methods-currently-exist)
3. 🌌 [Intro to coSMicQC](#introduction-to-cosmicqc)
4. 🎯 [Example of impact](#example-of-cosmicqc-impact)
5. 🚀 [Where do we go from here?](#whats-next)

## Defining quality control of single cell morphology profiles

> **Quality Control (QC)**  
> The process of validating and enforcing a specific standard across all products.

> **Single-cell morphology profiles**  
> Features (e.g., area, texture, intensity, etc.) extracted from images of cells. 
> Traditionally, profiles are formatted in a data frame where each row is single-cell, and columns are either metadata or feature extracted from a specific segmented part of a cell (e.g., nucleus, whole cell, or cytoplasm). 

Putting these two definitions together, single-cell quality control is the process of enforcing a standard quality based on single-cell morphology features, which we measure based on segmentation.

> ### Background on image-based profiling

Reviewer 2: It feels like this could be better in sequence if placed before the earlier section (to provide context for the definitions).

Author: Hmm I kinda like the definitions first to put the perspective of the next parts, but I can see both sides. I will keep for now, but thank you!

If you are unfamiliar to the standard process of image-based profiling, there are typically 3 main steps after collecting raw images:

{%
  include figure.html
  image="images/blog/cosmicqc/simple_image_based_profiling.png"
  width="100%"
%}

> > Simple workflow for image-based profiling including intermediate steps for CellProfiler, CytoTable, and pycytominer.

Reviewer 2: Consider using the `caption` feature of lab-website-template, which allows you to include this information with automatic formatting associated with the image.

Author: LOVE THIS! I will make the change for all the figures before merging!
